---
layout: post
title: "Formal Verification With Lean"
date: 2026-04-30
mathjax: true
utterance-issue: 21
---

# Introduction

[Lean](https://lean-lang.org/) is a [functional](https://lean-lang.org/functional_programming_in_lean)
programming language whose type system is powerful enough to encode mathematical propositions and proofs.
An important implication is that it is possible to use `lean` both to write programs and to
verify mathematical proofs about their properties.

The goal of this post is to introduce `lean`, use it to implement insertion sort 
and prove that the output of our implementation is always sorted.

As a warm up, we'll define the `LessThan` relation on natural numbers and prove basic 
properties such as transitivity.

Next we'll define the `IsLowerBound` and `IsSorted` list properties which are needed
to state and prove the correctness of insertion sort.

Finally, we'll implement insertion sort and prove that its output is always sorted.

Note that a full correctness proof of would include a proof that the output of
insertion sort is a permutation of the input. This permutation property was 
omitted in the interest of space and can be proved using similar techniques
to the ones in this post.

# Less Than

Lean bridges the gap between programs and proofs via
[dependent types](https://lean-lang.org/functional_programming_in_lean/Programming-with-Dependent-Types/#Functional-Programming-in-Lean--Programming-with-Dependent-Types).

To see how this works, we'll use dependent types to define a `LessThan` relation
on natural numbers and prove some of its properties.

## Programs And Proofs

In this section we'll introduce the `LessThan` type and give a high level 
overview of the relationship between programs and proofs.

The specifics of the `lean` syntax will be provided in the following sections.

The `LessThan` type represents the "less than" relation between pairs of natural numbers.
It is defined as follows:

```lean
inductive LessThan (n : Nat) : Nat → Prop where
  | base : LessThan n (n + 1)
  | step : {m : Nat} → LessThan n m → LessThan n (m + 1)
```

At a high level, this means that `LessThan` defines a _family_ of types.
For each pair of natural numbers `n m : Nat` there is a corresponding type `LessThan n m`.
Instances of types in the family can be built inductively via the `base` and `step` constructors.

For example, we can use the `base` constructor to build objects of type
`LessThan n (n + 1)` for some `n : Nat`:

```lean
(.base : LessThan 3 4)
```

We can then use the `step` constructor to increment the `m` index:

```lean
(.step .base : LessThan 3 5)
```

By recursively calling `.step` we can construct objects in `LessThan n m` for all
`n m : Nat` satisfying `n < m`. For example:

```lean
(.step (.step .base) : LessThan 3 6)
```

We call `LessThan` a _dependent type_ because each pair of natural numbers `n m : Nat`
defines a different type `LessThan n m`.

The `Prop` in the definition means that types in this family (such as `LessThan 3 4`)
belong to special class of types called _propositions_. In `lean` a proposition type is
defined to be _true_ if an instance of that type exists and _false_ if not.
An instance of a `Prop` type is called a _proof_ of the proposition.

For example, `LessThan 3 4` is a proposition and we can write this explicitly as

```lean
LessThan 3 4 : Prop
```

Furthermore, this proposition is true and the proof is the object we constructed above
with the `base` constructor:

```lean
(.base : LessThan 3 4)
```

We can declare the relationship between the proposition and the proof more explicitly
using the `theorem` keyword:

```lean
theorem three_lt_four : LessThan 3 4 := .base
```

As an example of a false proposition, consider

```lean
LessThan 0 0 : Prop
```

Indeed, it is easy to see that neither of
the two constructors of `LessThan` can output an object of type `LessThan 0 0`.
For example the `LessThan.base` constructor always outputs objects of type `LessThan n n + 1`
for some natural number `n : Nat`. We can verify this using `lean` via:

```lean
theorem not_zero_lt_zero : LessThan 0 0 → False
| h => nomatch h
```

Here the `nomatch` keyword asserts that there are no constructors matching
`LessThan 0 0`. We'll discuss `lean`'s matching syntax in detail below.

## Inductive Types

A common pattern in `lean` is to define objects inductively. Indeed, the natural
number type `Nat` is an inductive type with two constructors:

```lean
inductive Nat where
  | zero : Nat
  | succ (n : Nat) : Nat
```

This type has two constructors:

* `zero` : Constructs `0 : Nat`
* `succ n`: Given a natural number `n : Nat`, constructs `n + 1 : Nat`.

Numerals such as `2` are syntax sugar for the corresponding iterated application of `Nat`
constructors. For example:

```lean
example : 0 = .zero := by rfl
example : 1 = .succ .zero := by rfl
example : 2 = .succ (.succ .zero) := by rfl
```

In these examples, we are stating a proposition that the two sides of the `=` sign are equivalent.
We prove the propositions using the `rfl` tactic that applies when the two sides
are identical by definition. We'll go into more detail on tactics in the following sections.
The important take away for now is that instances of `Nat` are defined as the outputs of
iterated sequences of `Nat` constructors.

## Functions

In this section we'll introduce some `lean` syntax related to function definitions.

### Pattern Matching

Here is an example of a function definition:

```lean
def add (n m : Nat) : Nat := n + m
```

This function takes two natural numbers `n m : Nat` and outputs the natural number`n + m`.

Functions are called like this:

```lean
add 3 4
```

We can evaluate a function in the `lean` interpreter via:

```lean
#eval add 3 4
7
```

Types in `lean` are typically defined inductively.
Indeed, in the previous section we saw the inductive definition of `Nat`.
Therefore, it is convenient to define functions inductively as well.
For this purpose `lean` provides a _pattern matching_ syntax which we can use to rewrite our addition
function as:

```lean
def add (n : Nat) : Nat → Nat
  | .zero => n
  | .succ k => .succ (add n k)
```

As before, `n : Nat` is a function parameter and available in the entire scope of the definition.
However, rather than explicitly setting `m`, this implementation is defined via induction on `m`.
Specifically, the implementation depends on which `Nat` constructor was used to build `m` and is defined recursively:

* `zero`: If `m := Nat.zero` then `add n m = n`.
* `succ`: If `m := Nat.succ k` then `add n m = succ (add n k)`

`lean` provides syntax sugar which lets us write the `zero` constructor as simply `0`
and the `succ k` constructor as `k + 1`. We can use this to rewrite our function as:


```lean
def add (n : Nat) : Nat → Nat
  | 0 => n
  | k + 1 => (add n k) + 1
```

### Currying

In `lean`, if `S : Type` and `T : Type` are types then
the `S → T : Type` is the type representing functions from `S` to `T`.

The arrow `→` is associative to the right. For example: 

```lean
Nat → Nat → Nat = Nat → (Nat → Nat)
```

In other words, `Nat → Nat → Nat` represents functions `f` that take a natural number
`n : Nat` and return a _function_ 

```lean
f(n) : Nat → Nat
```

This means that we can use `f` to map a pair of natural numbers `n m : Nat` to an
output in `Nat` via:

```lean
f(n)(m) : Nat
```

The process of chaining together functions of a single variable to represent multi-variable
functions is called
[currying](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Currying).

The upshot is that we can think of types such as

```lean
S → T → U : Type
```

As representing functions that take two arguments with types `S` and `T` and output
an object of type `U`. 

For example, the type of the `add` function defined above is `Nat → Nat → Nat`:

```lean
add : Nat → Nat → Nat
```

## Less Than Revisited

We'll now explain our `LessThan` definition in more detail. Recall
that `LessThan` was defined by:

```lean
inductive LessThan (n : Nat) : Nat → Prop where
  | base : LessThan n (n + 1)
  | step : {m : Nat} → LessThan n m → LessThan n (m + 1)
```

The argument `n : Nat` is a _parameter_ for the type. This means that it is fixed
for the entire body of the type definition. Indeed, note that all of the `LessThan`
types in the definition body use the same parameter `n`.

The `Nat` following the colon specifies that the type depends on another natural
number and that this dependence will be defined inductively.
This kind of argument is called an _index_.

The next two rows define the constructors.

First consider the `base` constructor:

```lean
base : LessThan n (n + 1)
```

This means that for a given parameter `n : Nat`, the `base` constructor returns
an object of type `LessThan n (n + 1)`. In the language of proofs, we can think of this
as an axiom saying that for all natural numbers `n : Nat`, `n` is less than `n + 1`.

Now consider the `step` constructor:

```lean
step : {m : Nat} → LessThan n m → LessThan n (m + 1)
```

This constructor takes two arguments as input -
a natural number `m : Nat` and an object of type `LessThan n m`. The curly brackets around
`m` imply that `m` is an _implicit_ parameter. This means that `lean` can deduce the value of
`m` from the type of the `LessThan n m` argument and so we do not have to pass `m`
explicitly.

The constructor returns an object of type `LessThan n (m + 1)`.
In the language of proofs, this axiom states that if `n` is less than `m`,
then `n` is less than `m + 1`.

The point of these definitions is that by combining the `base` and `step` 
constructors we can construct objects of type
`LessThan n m` for all `n m : Nat` where `n` is less than `m`.

For example:

```lean
(.base : LessThan 1 2)
(.step .base : LessThan 1 3)
(.step (.step .base) : LessThan 1 4)
```

Note that the `m` and `n` arguments in the constructors on the left are automatically deduced from the
types on the right which is why we do not have to write them explicitly.
 
For example, consider the second row

```lean
(.step .base : LessThan 1 3)
```

Since the output type is `LessThan 1 3`, this fixes the parameter `n` to be `n=1`.
This in turn implies that `.base` must output the type `LessThan 1 2`.
Since the non-implicit argument to `step` is of type `LessThan n m`, this means
that the `step` constructor is run with `n=1` and `m=2` and, as expected, outputs
an object of type `LessThan 1 3`.

## Zero Is Less Than Successors

We've already proved some properties of `LessThan` that hold for specific numbers.
For example:

```lean
theorem one_lt_two : LessThan 1 2 := .base
```

This theorem states the property `LessThan 1 2` and proves it by constructing
an instance of `LessThan 1 2` via the `base` constructor.

Now let's prove a more general proposition:

> For all natural numbers `n : Nat`, `0 < n + 1`.

What should be the type corresponding to this proposition? One way of phrasing the
proposition is that for every natural number `n : Nat`, we must be able to produce a proof
that `0` is less than `n + 1`. In other words, for every natural number `n : Nat`
we must be able to construct an instance of `LessThan 0 (n + 1)`. A mapping from
natural numbers `n` to instances of `LessThan 0 (n + 1)` is simply a _function_
with type:

```lean
(n : Nat) → LessThan 0 (n + 1)
```

Proving the proposition is equivalent to constructing a function with this type.
Here is how we can define such a function this using pattern matching on `n : Nat` similarly to
the `add` example in section [Pattern Matching](#pattern-matching): 

```lean
theorem LessThan.zero_lt_succ : {n : Nat} → LessThan 0 (n + 1)
  -- n := .zero
  -- need to construct: LessThan 0 (0 + 1)
  | 0 => .base
  -- n := .succ n_prev
  -- in this case n = n_prev + 1.
  -- need to construct: LessThan 0 (n_prev + 1 + 1)
  -- proof: recursively call zero_lt_succ n_prev to obtain:
  --        LessThan 0 (n_prev + 1).
  --        then perform one step to obtain: LessThan 0 ((n_prev + 1) + 1).
  | n_prev + 1 => .step .zero_lt_succ
```

The name `LessThan.zero_lt_succ` simply puts `zero_lt_succ` in the `LessThan` namespace.

As we saw in section [Pattern Matching](#pattern-matching), the curly brackets around `n : Nat`
mean that `n` is an implicit argument and can be deduced by the return type.

Here is an application of this general theorem to a specific case:

```lean
theorem zero_lt_ten : LessThan 0 10 := .zero_lt_succ
```

Rather than defining `LessThan.zero_lt_succ` recursively,
`lean` also provides a _tactics_ syntax that we can use
to write the same proof in a style that resembles a traditional math proof:

```lean
theorem LessThan.zero_lt_succ (n : Nat) : LessThan 0 (n + 1) := by
  induction n with
  -- base case: n = 0. need to construct: LessThan 0 (0 + 1)
  | zero => exact .base
  -- inductive step:
  -- n = n_prev + 1.
  -- inductive hypothesis ih : LessThan 0 (n_prev + 1).
  -- need to construct an instance of LessThan 0 ((n_prev + 1) + 1)
  | succ n_prev ih => exact .step ih
```

The first difference is that now the `n : Nat` argument is before the colon.
This turns `n : Nat` into a parameter that is available in the
entire definition body. Then we use the `by` keyword to enter into _tactic mode_.  

In tactic mode we can use the `induction` tactic to split the goal of constructing
an element of `LessThan 0 (n + 1)` into two cases -
the base case where `n=0` and an inductive step where `n=n_prev+1` and we are given
an inductive hypothesis 

```lean
ih : LessThan 0 (n_prev + 1)
```

In both cases we construct an instance of the desired type `LessThan 0 (n + 1)`
using one of the `LessThan` constructors and _close the goal_ via the _exact_ tactic.

## Addition And Transitivity

We'll conclude our `LessThan` example by proving two more properties.

First we'll prove that adding a positive number to `n` results in a larger number:

> For all natural numbers n m : Nat, if `0 < m` then `n < n + m`.

Similarly to what we saw in the previous section, the corresponding type is:

```lean
LessThan 0 m →  LessThan n (n + m)
```

We can construct an function of this type by inductive pattern matching on the
`LessThan 0 m` argument:

```lean
-- For all n,m: if 0 < m  then n + m < m
theorem LessThan.add_right {n m : Nat} : LessThan 0 m →  LessThan n (n + m)
  -- base case: LessThan 0 m := .base
  -- this means that: m = 0 + 1
  -- need to construct: LessThan n (n + 1)
  | base => .base
  -- step case: LessThan 0 m := .step hk
  -- where:
  -- m = k + 1 and
  -- hk : LessThan 0 k
  -- need to construct: LessThan n (n + k + 1)
  -- proof: Recursively call .add_right hk to get an instance of LessThan n (n + k)
  --        then apply LessThan.step.
  | step hk => .step (.add_right hk)
```

The function `LessThan.add_right` has two implicit parameters `n m : Nat` and
an object of type `LessThan 0 m`. It outputs an object of type `LessThan n (n + m)`.

Similarly to what we saw in the `add` example in [Pattern Matching](#pattern-matching),
since `n m : Nat` are implicit `lean` deduces them from the type signature and
so we do not have to pass them explicitly. For example:

```lean
theorem zero_lt_three : LessThan 0 3 := .zero_lt_succ 2
theorem two_lt_five : LessThan 2 5 := .add_right zero_lt_three
```

Finally, let's prove that our `LessThan` property is transitive. This time we'll
use the induction tactic on the hypothesis `hmk : LessThan m k `:

```lean
-- For all n,m,k: If n < m and m < k then n < k.
theorem LessThan.trans {n m k : Nat}
  (hnm : LessThan n m) (hmk : LessThan m k) : LessThan n k := by
  induction hmk with
  -- base case: hmk : LessThan m (m + 1):= .base
  -- this means that: k = m + 1
  -- need to construct an object in LessThan n (m + 1)
  | base => exact .step hnm
  -- step case: hmk = .step hmk_prev
  -- where
  -- k = k_prev + 1
  -- hmk_prev : LessThan m k_prev
  -- induction hypothesis ih : LessThan n k_prev
  -- need to construct: LessThan n (k_prev + 1)
  | step _ ih => exact .step ih
```

Here is an example of applying the theorems above to deduce some inequalities.:

```lean
theorem one_lt_two : LessThan 1 2 := .base
theorem zero_lt_three : LessThan 0 3 := .zero_lt_succ 2
theorem two_lt_five : LessThan 2 5 := .add_right zero_lt_three
theorem one_lt_five : LessThan 1 5 := .trans one_lt_two two_lt_five
```

# Insertion Sort

The goal of this section is to implement insertion sort in `lean` and to prove that
the output of insertion sort is always sorted.

## Lists

For a given type `α : Type`, `List α : Type` is the type of lists with elements in `α`.
Similarly to `Nat`, it is an inductive type that has two constructors:

* The `empty` constructor constructs the empty list in `List α`.
* The `cons` constructor takes an element `x : α` and a list `xs : List α` and
  concatenates `x` with `xs` to obtain a new list denoted `x :: xs`. It is common
  to refer to `x` as the _head_ and to `xs` as the _tail_.

`lean` also provides syntax sugar for constructing lists using the common bracket notation.
For example, here are some equivalent list constructions:

```lean
example : [1] = .cons 1 .nil := by rfl
example : [1, 2] = .cons 1 (.cons 2 .nil) := by rfl
```

## Lower Bound

We'll now define the notion of an element being a lower bound on a list
using an inductive dependant type similar to `LessThan`.

From now on we'll require the type `α` to implement
a less-than-or-equal relation `≤` that is defined for each pair of elements:

```lean
variable {α : Type} [LE α] [DecidableRel (· ≤ · : α → α → Prop)]
```

Note that we are now forgetting our custom `LessThan` type and using the built in `LE`.
Similarly to our custom `LessThan` type, our assumption on `α` implies that
for all `x y : α` there is a corresponding proposition type

```
x ≤ y : Prop
```

Instances of `x ≤ y` can be built by iteratively applying the `≤` constructors which are
defined similarly to our `LessThan` constructors.

We can now define the `IsLowerBound` property:

```lean
inductive IsLowerBound (x : α) : List α → Prop where
  | nil : IsLowerBound x []
  | step : {y : α} → {ys : List α} → (x ≤ y) → IsLowerBound x ys →
            IsLowerBound x (y :: ys)
```

This type is in the `Prop` universe and has a parameter `x : α` and an 
index of type `List α`.

For a given parameter `x : α`, the constructors are defined via:

* `nil`: Constructs an object in `IsLowerBound x []`. In other words, `x` is trivially
  a lower bound on the empty set.
* `step`: This constructor has an implicit parameters `y : α` and `ys : List α`.
  It takes an instance of type `x ≤ y` and an instance of `IsLowerBound x ys`.
  It outputs an instance of `IsLowerBound x (y :: ys)`. This corresponds to an
  axiom that if `x ≤ y` and `x` is a lower bound on `ys` then `x` is a lower bound
  on `y :: ys`.

For example:

```lean
theorem one_lb_empty : IsLowerBound 1 [] := .nil
theorem one_lb_two : IsLowerBound 1 [2] := .step (by omega) one_lb_empty
theorem one_lb_three_two : IsLowerBound 1 [3, 2] := .step (by omega) one_lb_two
```

In the `one_lb_two` example, `lean` infers from the type  `IsLowerBound 1 [2]`
that the type of the first explicit argument to `step` must be the proposition `1 ≤ 2 : Prop`.
To construct this object (i.e proof that `1` is less than or equal to `2`) we enter tactic mode
with `by` and then use the `omega` tactic which automatically constructs proofs
of simple statements about integers. Similarly, in the `one_lb_three_two` example
the `omega` tactic is used to construct an instance of `1 ≤ 3 : Prop`.

Here are some useful properties of `IsLowerBound`:

```lean
-- If x is a lower bound of y :: ys then it is a lower bound of ys.
theorem IsLowerBound.tail{x y : α} {ys : List α} : IsLowerBound x (y :: ys) →
  IsLowerBound x ys
  -- only the step constructor can match IsLowerBound x (y :: ys). In this case
  -- IsLowerBound x (y :: ys) := .step hxy hx_ys
  -- where
  -- hxy : x ≤ y
  -- hx_ys : IsLowerBound x ys
  | .step _ hx_ys => hx_ys

-- If x is a lower bound of y :: ys then x ≤ y
theorem IsLowerBound.head_le {x y : α} {ys : List α} :
  IsLowerBound x (y :: ys) → x ≤ y
  | step hxy _ =>  hxy
```

For example, we can use `IsLowerBound.tail` to provide an alternative proof for
`one_lb_two`:


```lean
theorem one_lb_two : IsLowerBound 1 [2] := .tail one_lb_three_two
```

## Sorted

We'll now define the property of a list being sorted.

```lean
inductive IsSorted : List α → Prop where
  | nil : IsSorted []
  | single : {x : α} → IsSorted [x]
  | step : {x : α} → {y : α} → {ys : List α} → (x ≤ y) → IsSorted (y :: ys) →
      IsSorted (x :: y :: ys)
```

Similarly to `LessThan` and `IsLowerBound`, this is an inductive dependent `Prop` type.
It has three constructors which inductively can be used to construct an
instance of `IsSorted l` for a list `l : List α` if and only if `l` is sorted.

For example:

```lean
theorem empty_sorted : IsSorted ([] : List Int) := .nil
theorem one_sorted : IsSorted [1] := .single
theorem one_two_sorted : IsSorted [1, 2] := .step (by omega) .single
theorem one_two_three_sorted : IsSorted [1, 2, 3] := .step (by omega) (.step (by omega) .single)
```

As we saw in section [Inductive Types](#inductive-types),
`lean` deduces the values of the implicit constructor arguments from the output type.
For example, in `one_sorted`, it calls `.single` with `x := 1` because we are trying to
construct and object of type `IsSorted [1]`.

And, similarly to section [Lower Bound](#lower-bound),
the `by omega` calls use the `omega` tactic to construct instances of the necessary
`x ≤ y : Prop` types. For example, in `one_two_sorted` it builds an instance of the
proposition `1 ≤ 2 : Prop`.

Here are some useful properties of `IsSorted`.

```lean
-- If x :: xs is sorted then xs is sorted
theorem IsSorted.tail {x : α} {xs : List α} : IsSorted (x :: xs) →  IsSorted xs
  | .single => .nil
  | .step _ hs_y_ys => hs_y_ys

-- If x is a lower bound of xs and xs is sorted then x :: xs is sorted
theorem IsSorted.lb {x : α} {xs : List α} :
  IsLowerBound x xs → IsSorted xs → IsSorted (x :: xs)
  | .nil, _ => .single
  | .step hxy _, hs_y_ys => .step hxy hs_y_ys
```

For example:

```lean
theorem zero_lb_one_two : IsLowerBound 0 [1, 2] := .step (by omega) (.step (by omega) .nil)
theorem zero_one_two_sorted : IsSorted [0, 1, 2] := .lb zero_lb_one_two one_two_sorted
```

## Total Order

In order to prove that `insertionSort` outputs sorted lists, we will need to
strengthen our assumptions on the less-than-or-equal relation `≤`. Specifically,
we'll need to assume that it is
[transitive](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transitive_relation) and
[total](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connected_relation).
Relations that satisfy both properties are call [total orders](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_order).
We formally encode the definition of a total order in the following
[type class](https://lean-lang.org/doc/reference/latest/Type-Classes)

```lean
class TotalOrder (α : Type) [LE α] where
  total : (x y : α) →  x ≤ y ∨ y ≤ x
  trans : (x y z : α) → x ≤ y → y ≤ z → x ≤ z
```

In `lean`, a _type class_ is essentially an interface that can be implemented for a given type.
The `TotalOrder` interface extends the `LE` interface with two functions: 

* `total`: This function takes as input two elements `x y : α` and outputs an element of type
  `x ≤ y ∨ y ≤ x`. In the language of proofs, implementing this function is equivalent to proving that
  for all elements `x y : α`, `x ≤ y` or `y ≤ x`.

* `trans`: This function takes as input three elements `x y z: α`, an object of type
  `x ≤ y` and an object of type `y ≤ z`. It outputs an object of type `x ≤ z`.
  In the world of proofs, implementing this method is equivalent to proving that for all
  `x y z : α`, if `x ≤ y` and `y ≤ z` then `x ≤ z`.

Note that the OR relation `∨` is an inductive dependant type. For each pair of propositions
`P Q : Prop` it defines a new proposition `P ∨ Q : Prop`. The type `P ∨ Q` has two constructors,
one with an argument of type `P` and one with an argument of type `Q`. Therefore,
to construct an instance of `P ∨ Q` it is necessary to construct an instance of `P`
OR and instance of `Q`.

From now on we will assume that `≤` relation defined on our element type `α` is a total order:

```lean
variable [TotalOrder α]
```

Here are two useful properties of total orders:

```lean
-- if x ≤ y is false then y ≤ x
theorem le_of_not_le (x y : α) (h : ¬ x ≤ y) : y ≤ x :=
  -- Match the output of TotalOrder.total x y. By definition there are two
  -- possible constructors, one for each side of the OR.
  match TotalOrder.total x y with
  -- The left hand side ctor accepts an object hxy : x ≤ y. This contradicts the assumption
  -- h : ¬ x ≤ y and so we can apply the absurd tactic.
  | Or.inl hxy => absurd hxy h
  -- The right hand side ctor accepts an object hyz : y ≤ x. We can return it
  -- directly.
  | Or.inr hyx => hyx

-- ≤ is reflexive
theorem le_refl (x : α) : (x ≤ x) := by
  -- Match the output of TotalOrder.total x x. In this case both the left hand and
  -- right hand constructors take an element hxx : x ≤ x.
  -- Since we can directly return hxx in both cases, we use the map operator <;>
  -- to pipe both cases to the assumption tactic.
  cases TotalOrder.total x x <;> assumption
```

For example, the natural numbers are a total order and we can implement the
`TotalOrder` type class for `Nat` via:

```lean
instance : TotalOrder Nat where
  total := Nat.le_total
  trans := @Nat.le_trans
```

We can now apply `le_refl`:

```lean
theorem one_le_one : 1 ≤ 1 := le_refl 1
```

We can use the transitivity of `≤` to prove that `IsLowerBound` is transitive as well.

```lean
-- If x ≤ y and y is a lower bound for the list l then x is a lower bound for l.
theorem IsLowerBound.trans {x y : α} {l : List α}
  (hxy : x ≤ y) (hyl : IsLowerBound y l) : IsLowerBound x l := by
  -- Use induction on hyl : IsLowerBound y l
  induction hyl with
  -- base case: hyl : IsLowerBound y l := .base
  -- This means that l = []
  | nil => exact .nil
  -- step case: hyl : IsLowerBound y l := .step hyz hy_zs
  -- where:
  -- l = z :: zs and we have objects
  -- hyz : y ≤ z and
  -- hy_zs : IsLowerBound y zs
  -- induction hypothesis: 
  -- hx_zs : IsLowerBound x zs
  | step hyz hy_zs hx_zs =>
    -- By transitivity we can construct hxz : x ≤ z
    have hxz := TotalOrder.trans _ _ _ hxy hyz
    -- Apply IsLowerBound.step with hxz and hx_zs to construct IsLowerBound x (z :: zs)
    exact .step hxz hx_zs
```

For example:

```lean
theorem zero_lb_three_two : IsLowerBound 0 [3, 2] := .trans (by omega) one_lb_three_two
```

Finally, we can use the transitivity of `IsLowerBound` to prove the following relationship
between the `IsLowerBound` and `IsSorted` properties:

```lean
-- If x :: xs is sorted then x is a lower bound of xs.
theorem IsLowerBound.sorted {x : α} {xs : List α} (hs : IsSorted (x :: xs)) :
  IsLowerBound x xs := by
  -- Use induction on the tail xs for an arbitrary head x.
  revert x
  induction xs with
  -- xs = []
  | nil => intro x hs; exact .nil
  -- xs = y :: ys and we have the induction hypothesis
  -- ih : {z : α} → IsSorted (z :: ys) → IsLowerBound z ys
  -- I.e the inductive hypothesis states that for all z, if z :: ys is sorted then
  -- z is a lower bound on ys.
  | cons y ys ih =>
    -- the intro tactic introduces objects corresponding to our assumptions:
    -- x : α
    -- hs : IsSorted (x :: y :: ys)
    intro x hs
    -- Pattern match the constructor of hs : IsSorted (x :: y :: ys).
    cases hs with
    -- Only the step constructor matches. In this case
    -- hs : IsSorted (x :: y :: ys) := .step hxy h_sorted_y_ys
    -- where:
    -- hxy : x ≤ y
    -- h_sorted_y_ys : IsSorted (y :: ys)
    | step hxy h_sorted_y_ys =>
      -- Apply the inductive hypothesis ih to y :: ys to prove that
      -- y is a lower bound on ys.
      have hy_lb_ys : IsLowerBound y ys := ih h_sorted_y_ys
      -- Since y ≤ y, we can apply IsLowerBound.step to conclude that
      -- y is also a lower bound on y :: ys
      have hy_lb_y_ys : IsLowerBound y (y :: ys) := .step (le_refl y) hy_lb_ys
      -- The result now follows from x ≤ y and transitivity of IsLowerBound
      exact .trans hxy hy_lb_y_ys
```

For example:

```lean
theorem one_lb_two_three : IsLowerBound 1 [2, 3]:= .sorted one_two_three_sorted
```

## Algorithm

Recall that [insertion sort](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Insertion_sort) sorts
a collection of elements by inserting them one by one into a list. The insertion
is done via an `insertSorted` procedure which inserts an element into a sorted list
at a position chosen such that that the new list is still sorted.

We'll start by implementing `insertSorted` in `lean`.

```lean
def insertSorted (x : α) : List α → List α
  | [] => [x]
  | y :: ys => if x ≤ y then x :: y :: ys else y :: insertSorted x ys
```

This function has a parameter `x : α` of type `α` and an additional
argument of type `List α`. The output is also of type `List α`.

The function is defined via pattern matching on the `List α` argument similarly to
the `add` example in [Pattern Matching](#pattern-matching).
As we saw in section [Lists](#lists), the `List α` type has two constructors that
we must match:

* `empty`: In this case the input list is `[]`. Inserting `x` into `[]` is just `[x]`.
* `cons`: In this case the input list is of the form `y :: ys` where `y : α` and
  `ys : List α`. To insert `x` into `y :: ys` we compare `x` with the head `y`.
  If `x ≤ y` then `x` should be inserted in the front of the list and
  so we return `x :: y :: ys`. Otherwise, `x` should come after `y` and should be inserted
  somewhere in the tail `ys`. Therefore, we return `y :: insertSorted x ys`.

For example:

```lean
#eval insertSorted 2 [1, 3]
[1, 2, 3]
```

It is now easy to implement insertion sort:

```lean
def insertionSort : List α → List α
  | [] => []
  | x :: xs => insertSorted x (insertionSort xs)
```

`insertionSort` is also defined by matching the constructor of the input list:

* `empty`: The result of sorting the empty list is `[]`.
* `cons`: In this case the input list is of the form `x :: xs`. First we sort the
  tail by evaluating `insertionSort xs`. Then we insert the head into the sorted tail via
  `insertSorted x (insertionSort xs)`.

For example:

```lean
#eval insertionSort [3, 4, 2, 1]
[1, 2, 3, 4]
```

## Sorted Output

In this section we'll prove that for every list `l : List α`,
the list `insertionSort l : List α` is sorted.

Since by definition `insertionSort` iteratively inserts elements into a sorted list,
the key is to prove that for all
`x : α` and `l : List α`, if `l : List α` is sorted then `insertSorted x l`
is also sorted.

We'll start with the weaker claim that `insertSorted` preserves lower bounds: 

```lean
-- If x is a lower bound of ys and x ≤ y then x is a lower bound of insertSorted y ys.
theorem insertSorted_lb {x y : α} {ys : List α} (h_lb : IsLowerBound x ys) (hxy : x ≤ y) :
  IsLowerBound x (insertSorted y ys) := by
  -- Proof by induction on the definition of insertSorted.
  fun_induction insertSorted with
  -- case1: 
  -- ys = []
  -- By definition: insertSorted y ys = [y]
  -- The claim follows from hxy and IsLowerBound.step
  | case1 => exact .step hxy .nil
  -- case2:
  -- ys = z :: zs
  -- hyz : y ≤ z
  -- By definition: insertSorted y ys = y :: z :: zs
  -- The claim follows from hxy and IsLowerBound.step
  | case2 z zs hyz => exact .step hxy h_lb
  -- case3:
  -- ys = z :: zs
  -- h_not_yz: not y ≤ z
  -- By assumption we have: h_lb : IsLowerBound x (z :: zs)
  -- By definition: insertSorted y ys = z :: insertSorted y zs
  -- Inductive hypothesis:
  -- ih : IsLowerBound x zs → IsLowerBound x (insertSorted y zs)
  -- We need to show: IsLowerBound x (z :: insertSorted (y :: zs))
  -- Proof: 1. Since x is a lower bound on z :: zs it follows from
  --           IsLowerBound.head that x ≤ z and from IsLowerBound.tail that
  --           x is a lower bound on zs.
  --        2. x is a lower bound on insertSorted y zs:
  --           This follows from IsLowerBound x zs and the induction hypothesis.
  --        3. The claim follows by applying IsLowerBound.step to x ≤ z and
  --           IsLowerBound x zs.
  | case3 z zs h_not_yz ih =>
    have hxz : x ≤ z := IsLowerBound.head_le h_lb
    have h_x_zs : IsLowerBound x zs := .tail h_lb
    have hx_ins_y_zs : IsLowerBound x (insertSorted y zs) := ih h_x_zs
    exact .step hxz hx_ins_y_zs
```

 We'll now use `insertSorted_lb` to prove that `insertSorted` preserves the `IsSorted`
property:

```lean
-- If xs is sorted then insertSorted x xs is sorted.
theorem insertSorted_sorted {x : α} {xs : List α} (hs : IsSorted xs) :
  IsSorted (insertSorted x xs) := by
  -- Proof by induction on the definition of insertSorted.
  fun_induction insertSorted with
  -- case1:
  -- xs = []
  -- By definition: insertSorted x xs = [x]
  -- In this case the claim is trivial.
  | case1 => exact .single
  -- case2:
  -- xs = y :: ys
  -- hxy : x ≤ y.
  -- By definition: insertSorted x xs = x :: y :: ys
  -- In this case x ≤ y and so we can apply IsSorted.step to deduce that 
  -- x :: y :: ys is sorted.
  | case2 y ys h_xy => exact .step h_xy hs
  -- case3:
  -- xs = y :: ys
  -- h_not_le: not x ≤ y
  -- Induction hypothesis ih: For all z, if ys is sorted then insertSorted z ys is sorted.
  -- By definition: insertSorted x xs = y :: insertSorted x ys
  -- Therefore, we need to show: y :: (insertSorted x :: ys) is sorted
  -- Proof: 1. y is a lower bound on insertSorted x :: ys:
  --           Since y :: ys is sorted, y is a lower bound on ys. Since y ≤ x
  --           insertSorted_lb implies that y is a lower bound on insertSorted x ys.
  --        2. insertSorted x ys is sorted:
  --           Since y :: ys is sorted, ys is sorted. Therefore, by the induction
  --           hypothesis, insertSorted x ys is sorted.
  --        3. Since y is a lower bound on insertSorted x :: ys and
  --           insertSorted x :: ys is sorted and x ≤ y it follows from
  --           IsSorted.lb that y :: insertSorted x :: ys is sorted.
  | case3 y ys h_not_le ih =>
    have h_le : y ≤ x := le_of_not_le x y h_not_le
    have hy_ys : IsLowerBound y ys := IsLowerBound.sorted hs
    have hy_ins_x_ys : IsLowerBound y (insertSorted x ys) := insertSorted_lb hy_ys h_le
    have ys_sorted := IsSorted.tail hs
    have ins_x_ys_sorted : IsSorted (insertSorted x ys) := ih ys_sorted
    exact IsSorted.lb hy_ins_x_ys ins_x_ys_sorted
```

Finally, we can prove that the output of `insertionSort` is sorted by induction
on the input list where the induction step uses `insertSorted_sorted`:

```lean
theorem insertionSort_sorted (l : List α) : IsSorted (insertionSort l) := by
  induction l with
  -- l := []
  | nil => exact .nil
  -- l := x :: xs
  -- Induction hypothesis ih : IsSorted insertionSort xs
  -- By definition: insertionSort l := insertSorted x (insertionSort xs)
  -- The claim follows immediately by applying insertSorted_sorted to ih.
  | cons x xs ih => exact insertSorted_sorted ih
```